In this lecture, you'll learn about the first option for configuring a DCHP server, which is using
a Cisco router.
You've really got two main options for your DHCP server.
You can use a Cisco router or you can use an external server, which is probably going to be running on Windows,
or maybe Linux or Unix.
So we'll take a look at the first option here, which is using a Cisco router.
If you're going to do this, it's most likely to be a small network, like a branch office where you
don't want to go to the expense of putting in a dedicated server to act as your DHCP server.
You're already going to have a Cisco router in that office anyway for doing the routing,
so you can also use it as the DHCP server as well, and there's not going to be any additional cost to do that.
So, we're going to have a look at this in the lab in a second.
In our scenario, we've got small branch office.
We've got R1 there, which is configured with IP address, 10.10.10.1 /24 on its
fastEthernet0/1 interface,
and there are DHCP clients on that network that it's going to give IP addresses to.
So, we need to configure a DHCP pool for the 10.10.10.0 /24 subnet.
We've also got a DNS server in the office as well at IP address 10.10.20.10,
and we also want to give the client PCs that information as well. So the commands to configure
this,
first off, we're going to specify our excluded addresses.
Typically in a subnet,
you might have some hosts there that you're going to want to have a fixed IP address. For example,
printers, or the router itself, other network infrastructure devices.
So usually, you're not going to give out every single address in the entire IP subnet for DHCP clients.
You're probably going to have a few addresses that are reserved.
You'll usually have the reserved addresses either at the start of the scope or at the end of the scope,
For example, 1 to 10 or 240 to 254.
In our example here, we're going to exclude addresses 10.10.10.1 to 10.10.10.10 from the DHCP scope, and it's a good idea to put this command
in first before you configure the DHCP scope, so that way, clients won't get them before you exclude
them.
So the command to do this is at global configuration,
'ip dhcp excluded-address' and then the starting IP address, 10.10.10.1, for our example,
and then a space,
and then the ending address in the range, 10.10.10.10.
So, 10.10.10.1 to 10.10.10.10 will not be given out to clients.
We then need to configure our DHCP pool.
So again, at global config, we say 'ip dhcp pool' and for our example, I've called it '10.10.10.0_Clients',
but you can call it anything you like.
We could have called it 'ip dhcp pool MickeyMouse' if we wanted to.
That will then take you to your DHCP configuration.
The next command, we say 'network 10.10.10.0 255.255.255.0'.
That's where we specify the IP range of addresses that we're going to be giving out and also the
subnet mask as well.
So clients will be given an IP address from this range and that subnet mask, and the addresses will be given
out on a first-come first-serve basis. Next command, 'default router 10.10.10.1', to tell the clients
where their default gateway is,
and finally, we've said 'dns-server 10.10.20.10' to also tell them where the DNS server is.
So, that's our configuration.
To verify it, we can say 'show ip dhcp pool', and for our example here, you can see that leased
addresses is 2.
So, we have given out 2 addresses in this range. To see the addresses that were given out and who they
were given out to,
we can say
'show ip dhcp binding'
and here, I can see that 10.10.10.11 was given out to the client with MAC address
ending D116, and then 10.10.10.12 was given out to the client with MAC address ending
A359.
So, you can see it started giving out addresses starting with 10.10.10.11 because we'd excluded 10.10.10.1 to
10.10.10.10.
Okay, so that's it.
Pretty simple configuration.
And for the lab demo, we're going to use that exact scenario again.
So, we'll configure R1. We'll configure it with a DHCP scope
for the 10.10.10.0 subnet. So let's go on to R1, you can see I've already got my interfaces
configured there.
I'll go to global configuration,
I want to exclude the addresses first
that I don't want to give out.
So that's 'ip dhcp excluded-address 10.10.10.1 10.10.10.10'.
Then, I configure my pool. So I say 'ip dhcp pool',
I'll call this one Demo, and then the network that I want to be assigning addresses for,
so 10.10.10.0 255.255.255.0. The default router
is this router itself at 10.10.10.1,
and I also want to specify the DNS server, which was at 10.10.20.10.
Okay, so that's it all configured,
and then to verify it, I can do a 'show ip dchp pool'.
Let's see if the clients have taken their IP addresses yet.
Looks like they have, 2 of them of being leased. To verify, 'show ip dhcp binding',
and there I can see that my two clients have picked up their IP addresses from DHCP.
The first one got 10.10.10.11 and the second one got 10.10.10.12.
So, that's how you configure a Cisco router to be a DHCP server.
In the next lecture, we'll look at how to configure the Cisco router to support an external DHCP server.